43 testdata guidelines (#44)
NetherlandsForensicInstitute/puma: TESTDATA_GUIDELINES.md

<!-- TOC -->
* [Guidelines for creating test data](#guidelines-for-creating-test-data)
    * [Terminology](#terminology)
    * [Multiple apps](#multiple-apps)
  * [0. Why make your own test data?](#0-why-make-your-own-test-data)
    * [Ground truth](#ground-truth)
    * [Completeness](#completeness)
    * [The GDPR (or similar privacy legislation)](#the-gdpr-or-similar-privacy-legislation)
    * [Exotic applications](#exotic-applications)
  * [1. Plan ahead](#1-plan-ahead)
    * [Investigate the application](#investigate-the-application)
    * [Create a script](#create-a-script)
    * [Consider using self-descriptive data](#consider-using-self-descriptive-data)
    * [Generating large amounts of realistic data](#generating-large-amounts-of-realistic-data)
  * [2. Creating the test data](#2-creating-the-test-data)
    * [Creating test data with Puma](#creating-test-data-with-puma)
    * [Creating test data manually](#creating-test-data-manually)
  * [3. Extracting and storing the test data](#3-extracting-and-storing-the-test-data)
    * [Extraction](#extraction)
    * [Storing the test data](#storing-the-test-data)
  * [4. Conclusion](#4-conclusion)
<!-- TOC -->

> At the NFI we have been making reference data for some time now, and through the years we discovered some best practices

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At the NFI, we have been making reference data for some time now, and through the years we discovered some best practices
```

> improving our process but also the quality of the test data itself. If you are also using Puma to create reference or

Reviewer: ```suggestion
improving our process, but also the quality of the data itself. If you are also using Puma to create reference or
```

test data, this document will help you to create your datasets better and faster.

### Terminology

In this document, the terms test data and reference data are used interchangeably. While they aren't the exact same, the
difference is in the use of the data, not the contents of it. Since this document is only about how we create this data,
in this document the terms can be considered synonymous.

### Multiple apps

In this document we often talk about 'your application', and the assumption seems to be made that only one application
is involved in the creation of your test data. Of course, this isn't necessarily the case: You might want to create
reference data involving multiple applications.

If this is the case, this document still applies: anywhere we mention 'your application' consider this as 'your one or
more applications'. Puma is perfectly able to operate multiple apps at the same time, and all principles considered in
this document apply to multiple applications just as well as they do to one.

> ## 0. Why make your own test data?

Reviewer: While I understand why you have added this section, it seems very extensive and a little defensive (like someone is saying that this library is useless, but people probably don't think that if they've gotten this far). Maybe just make this a list of reasons why we make our own data, and leave it at that. Or maybe put some of this in the README, to explain why Puma exists?

Before we get into making test data, let's focus on whether you actually want to do so. After all: if you want some
reference data on specific apps, you'll probably find some example files online with a quick Google search. Well,

> there's a few reasons why we at the NFI prefer to make our own datasets:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
there's a few reasons why at the NFI, we prefer to make our own datasets.
```

### Ground truth

Say for example you have a populated chat database you found online or got from some device, and you have a bunch of
messages with a timestamp: how are you going to find out what that timestamp is? Is it the time the message was sent,
received, or read? And was it the server time or the device time? And what if you cannot find any pictures in the
database, does that mean this chat app doesn't store pictures in the database, or that you just happened to find a

> database of a user that ahs never sent or received a picture?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
database of a user that has never sent or received a picture?
```

> When you create your own test data you know which actions exactly were taken, which makes it much easier to figure out

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you create your own test data, you know which actions exactly were taken, which makes it much easier to figure out
```

what your data means.

### Completeness

Say you ignore the last point, and you are convinced you will be able to figure out what the data means exactly, but now
you notice that there isn't a single picture in the database. Now you have to go back to searching the internet for

> another database with pictures. THat probably isn't too hard, pictures after all are pretty common. So you find that.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
another database with pictures. That probably isn't too hard, pictures after all are pretty common. So you find that.
```

But what about group chats? What about people being removed from a group chat or leaving by themselves? What about
pictures that can be viewed once but haven't been opened yet? What changed avatars on the public profile?

These are just examples of chat applications, but the same holds true for all other types of apps: with ever-expanding
features of applications it becomes virtually impossible to find organic user data that contains all possible user

> actions. Or, more specific, all user actions of interest to your project you want to create reference data for.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
actions. Or, more specifically, all user actions of interest to your project you want to create reference data for.
```

data is probably illegal under the GDPR, or at the very least a possible problem.

When you create your own test data with dummy accounts, you can rest assured there won't be any problems, as you're not
using real personal data.

⚠️ Be careful even when creating your own data! Some applications will automatically store data from other users (for
example public chat channels or "users nearby" features). If these features are included in your apps, you may still
need consider the GDPR.

### Exotic applications

Lastly, the most obvious point: some applications simply aren't that common, so finding data from them online or from
other sources is not an option.

## 1. Plan ahead

Now that you're convinced to create your own test data, let's get to it. The first step is careful planning. You might
be tempted to just start sending messages or start browsing in the app you want to generate reference data for, but from
experience we learned creating test data is something best properly planned ahead.

### Investigate the application

As [stated before](#Completeness), apps these days have MANY features. Therefore, it's a good idea to explore the

> application you want to create test data with. Even if you use this app privately, you'll probably find feature you

Reviewer: ```suggestion
application you want to create test data with. Even if you use this app privately, you'll probably find features you
```

> never knew.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
never knew existed.
```

If you're creating the reference data for a specific goal (forensic research, network analysis, or something else),
keep this goal in mind: if you're only doing forensic research on pictures, there's probably no need to delve into the
details of calendar appointments... Although: make sure to check if those appointments can contain a picture or
thumbnail!

The goal of this investigation is having a concise list of application features you want to cover.

### Create a script

> After you have a list of all features you want to cover, it's time to write a script. And this isn't necessarily a Puma

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you have a list of all features you want to cover, it's time to write a script. And this isn't necessarily a Puma
```

script: Puma can help you to automate actions, but if your reference data is about an app that Puma doesn't support, and
you're just going to cover 10 user actions, you'll probably save time by executing the actions manually to create your
reference data.

Still, even when you create the data manually, write down a **precise**, **chronological** and **complete** description
of all actions you will take to create the reference data.

By **precise** we mean there should be no room for ambiguity. `send a picture in whatsapp` is not precise: does this
mean using the embedded camera to take a picture and send it, or does it mean sending a picture stored on the device?
Be sure every action in your script unambiguously describes one specific user action in the application.

> By **complete** we mean you should obviously include all actions you will take, but also actions you do not take: after

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By **complete** we mean you should include all actions you will take, but also actions you will not take: after
```

> sending a picture from Alice to Bob, include in your script whether or not Bob opens the picture. When making a call

Reviewer: This is the first mention of Alice and Bob, and it's not very clear where the names come from. Maybe explain it or use something like `user 1` and `user 2`?

from Alice to Bob, and Bob should answer, include how long Bob should wait before answering.

> By **chronological** we mean the way time works.

Reviewer: This seems a little short? Maybe something like this:
```suggestion
By **chronological** we mean that you should write the actions in the order you want to execute them.
```

If you use Puma, your script will look something like this:

```python
alice = WhatsappActions('emulator-5554')
bob = WhatsappActions('emulator-5556')
alice.send_message(f'1. This is the first message, sent by Alice to Bob, sent at {current_time()}', chat='Bob')
sleep(60)
bob.send_message(f'2. This message is sent by Bob to Alice, sent at {current_time()}', chat='Alice')
```

> If you create the test data manually, your script won't be python code but will ook similar:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you create the test data manually, your script won't be Python code but will look similar:
```

```
Alice to Bob at hh:mm: 1. This is the first message, sent by Alice to Bob, sent at hh:mm
(wait 1 minute)
Bob to Alice at hh:mm: 2. This message is sent by Bob to Alice, sent at hh:mm
```

You will notice we are waiting a full minute between the messages. We often do this (not between all messages, but
between some) because we will use our reference data to analyze the file format. By waiting a full minute there is a

> distinct difference between the time stamps, making it easier for se to keep these timestamps apart and verify them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
distinct difference between the timestamps, making it easier for se to keep these timestamps apart and verify them.
```

You can also see we're prepending the messages with a sequence number. We do this because it makes it easier for us to
verify whether we could retrieve all sent messages form the reference data, and whether the order of messages is
maintained in storage.

> Lastly, you're notice the messages aren't a simple `Hi!`. This is what we call self-descriptive data and for our

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Lastly, you'll notice the messages aren't a simple `Hi!`. This is what we call self-descriptive data and for our
```

> research at the NFI we vastly prefer this over realistic messages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
research at the NFI we greatly prefer this over realistic messages.
```

Reviewer: And maybe (shortly) explain why we prefer this?

### Consider using self-descriptive data

Depending on the goal of your reference data, you might want to consider using self-descriptive data. This is data of
which the content describes itself, for example a chat message `This is a message from Alice to Bob sent at 2024-10-01
14:53 UTC`, or a layer in a layered image file containing `This is text on layer 1, the letters are red, and there is
a second layer with blue text`.

Self-descriptive data comes in very handy when you're doing (forensic) analysis of a file format, as it makes it easier
to interpret the data and prevent mistakes.

### Generating large amounts of realistic data

If the goal of your reference data is not to analyze the data content itself, but rather to create a large amount of

> synthetic that looks like real, organic user data, obviously self-descriptive data is not for you.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
synthetic data that looks like real, organic user data, obviously self-descriptive data is not for you.
```

If you want to create large amounts of realistic user data (like thousands of chat messages that look real), use Puma
and have an LLM create the conversations for you. How to do that is beyond the scope of this document, but current day

> LLMs are smart enough to understand the Puma API (just give it the python code and the LLM will understand) and ask it

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
LLMs are smart enough to understand the Puma API (just give it the Python code and the LLM will understand) and ask it
```

> to generate the python code containing the number of messages you need, on topics you want.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
to generate the Python code containing the number of messages you need, on topics you want.
```

## 2. Creating the test data

After you have your script describing the actions you will take, you can either use Puma to create the test data, or
create it manually.

When deciding whether to use Puma, consider the following:

* Does Puma already support your application?

> * Will you create the reference data multiple times? (eg on different phones, OS versions, or app versions)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Are you planning to create the reference data multiple times? (e.g. on different phones, OS versions, or app versions)
```

* Are you creating a large amount of data (eg 100+ messages)?

If the answer to any of these questions is yes, our experience is that Puma will save you time.

If Puma doesn't support your app, and this is a one-time thing, and you're just doing a dozen or so user actions, we

> recommend just doing ti manually

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
recommend just doing it manually
```

### Creating test data with Puma

If your app is not supported in Puma, you will need to add support for it. To do so, read
the [contributing documentation](CONTRIBUTING.md).

After you have written the Puma code and your Puma script, you can now execute it. Be sure to properly prepare the

> device (enable USB debugging!) and install the application. It's a good idea to go into the app settings and grant all

Reviewer: Is it possible to refer to a place where we explain how to enable USB debugging?

possible permissions to the app, to prevent popups from getting in the way of your Puma script.

> If this is the first time you're running your script, we recommend 'babysitting' it: it is very possible that some

Reviewer 2: Maybe explain here that this can be done when running an emulator in `interactive mode`.

Author: That's a thing that only exists in our other project, Android emulators (and real phones, obiously) by default have the screen visible :)

actions will fail, and when you see what happens it'll be easier to fix your code. Sometimes you can also manually
intervene and do a tap that you forgot to put in your Puma code.

> If you are repeating this experiment, after babysitting your puma script once or twice all the problems should be ironed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you are repeating this experiment, after babysitting your Puma script once or twice, all the problems should be ironed
```

out and a complete hands-off approach should be possible: just start the script and go get some coffee!

### Creating test data manually

We highly recommend to manually create test data with two people: an operator who operates the device(s), and a
coordinator who handles the script. The coordinator tells the operator which action to take next, and annotates the

> script with the time stamps. In case the operator makes a mistake (makes a typo or executes the wrong user action in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
script with the timestamps. In case the operator makes a mistake (e.g. makes a typo or executes the wrong user action in
```

> the UI, or perhaps the coordinator gave th wrong instruction), the coordinator also writes this down.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the UI, or perhaps the coordinator gave the wrong instruction), the coordinator also writes this down.
```

At first glance it might seem overkill to have two people 'just play around with a phone', but a mistake is made **very

> easily**. Having two people in this process greatly reduces the number of mistakes you will make (yes, mistakes will be

Reviewer 2: Maybe making `very easily` bold is a bit too strong :-) Just remove this emphasis?

made).

By having the coordinator annotate everything, you end up with a complete and correct script of all actions that were

> taken, including the time stamps. This is valuable metadata that you can store along your reference data after

Reviewer: ```suggestion
taken, including the timestamps. This is valuable metadata that you can store along your reference data after
```

> extraction, so when you analyze the reference data, you know exactly how it was created and what you could find in that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
extraction, so when you analyze the reference data, you know exactly how it was created and what you can find in that
```

data.

## 3. Extracting and storing the test data

### Extraction

After you have executed the script, your reference data is now ready, you just need to extract it. How to do this
depends on what data you need:

> 1. If you do network analysis, I hope you didn't forget to record the network traffic!

Reviewer: If this is a warning, maybe put this somewhere closer to the top? ;)

2. If you want a full device image, use your favorite tool to make this image
3. If you only want specific app data, you'll need to delve into the device to find its location

The first two cases are trivial, in the sense that if you're doing this sort of analysis you probably don't need any
help to collect the data you want.

> In the last case, you might not know where to get the data. And you;re not alone: I don't know either. Where app store

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the last case, you might not know where to get the data. And you're not alone: I don't know either. Where app store
```

> their data is dependent on the OS and the app itself.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
data is dependent on the OS and the app itself.
```

> Luckily on modern mobile devices, apps cannot just store data anywhere they want. On android, relevant app data is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Luckily on modern mobile devices, apps cannot just store data anywhere they want. On Android, relevant app data is
```

> usually stored in `/data/data/<package name of your app>`. Within this folder, the app can chose how to store its data.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
usually stored in `/data/data/<package name of your app>`. Within this folder, the app can choose how to store its data.
```

> What we usually do is copy this entire folder and then explore this data.

Reviewer: I think for iOS, we can add a similar path, right? We know where app data is generally stored.

### Storing the test data

After you extracted the data you want, you can now do your thing with it, but after that, you probably don't want to
delete it.

At the NFI, we store all reference data, along with metadata describing the reference data. This metadata file includes
the following:

> * file type + version if applicable

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* File type + version if applicable
```

* Creation date + location
* Device + OS on which it was created
* Content description (eg `chat database of foo@bar.com, containing 213 messages`)
* Reproduction steps: the exact and complete steps you took to create this data. This contains either a reference to
  your Puma script, or the annotated script

By storing these together, you can start building a full archive of high-quality reference data of which anyone can
easily find out where data came from and how it was created. If anyone in the (far) future ever wants to reproduce your
process, or expand on it, they can now easily do so.

## 4. Conclusion

> The creation of test data is not a trivial thing, and doing it right even less so. In this document I tried to summarize

Reviewer: I would maybe avoid using "I" in this text. It feels a little too informal. I think it's possible to get the same point across without using it?

the most important best practices. Some of them might sound trivial, but I can assure you we only thought of them after

> doing things differently first, resulting in either wasted time or test dat of lower quality.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
doing things differently first, resulting in either wasted time or test data of lower quality.
```

    * [Consider using self-descriptive data](#consider-using-self-descriptive-data)
    * [Generating large amounts of realistic data](#generating-large-amounts-of-realistic-data)
  * [2. Creating the test data](#2-creating-the-test-data)
    * [Creating test data with Puma](#creating-test-data-with-puma)
    * [Creating test data manually](#creating-test-data-manually)
  * [3. Extracting and storing the test data](#3-extracting-and-storing-the-test-data)
    * [Extraction](#extraction)
    * [Storing the test data](#storing-the-test-data)
  * [4. Conclusion](#4-conclusion)
<!-- TOC -->

At the NFI, we have been making reference data for some time now, and through the years we discovered some best
practices improving our process, but also the quality of the data itself. If you are also using Puma to create
reference or test data, this document will help you to create your datasets better and faster.

### Terminology

In this document, the terms test data and reference data are used interchangeably. While they aren't exactly the same
thing, the difference is in the use of the data, not the contents of it. Since this document is only about how we create

> this data, in this document the terms can be considered synonymous.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
this data, the terms can be considered synonymous here.
```

### Multiple apps

In this document we often talk about 'your application', and the assumption seems to be made that only one application

> is involved in the creation of your test data. Of course, this isn't necessarily the case: You might want to create

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
is involved in the creation of your test data. Of course, this isn't necessarily the case: you might want to create
```

reference data involving multiple applications.

If this is the case, this document still applies: anywhere we mention 'your application' consider this as 'your one or
more applications'. Puma is perfectly able to operate multiple apps at the same time, and all principles considered in
this document apply to multiple applications just as well as they do to one.

## 0. Why make your own test data?

Before we get into making test data, let's focus on whether you actually want to do so. After all: if you want some
reference data on specific apps, you'll probably find some example files online with a quick Google search. Well,
there's a few reasons why we at the NFI prefer to make our own datasets:

### Ground truth

Say for example you have a populated chat database you found online or got from some device, and you have a bunch of
messages with a timestamp: how are you going to find out what that timestamp is? Is it the time the message was sent,
received, or read? And was it the server time or the device time? And what if you cannot find any pictures in the

> database, does that mean this chat app doesn't store pictures in the database, or that you just happened to find a

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
database? Does that mean this chat app doesn't store pictures in the database? Or, that you just happened to find a
```

database of a user that has never sent or received a picture?

> When you create your own test data, you know which actions exactly were taken, which makes it much easier to figure out

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When you create your own test data, you know which actions exactly were taken. This makes it much easier to figure out
```

what your data means.

### Completeness

> Say you ignore the last point, and you are convinced you will be able to figure out what the data means exactly, but now

Reviewer 3: This first sentence seems a bit long, maybe you can somehow split it in 2?

you notice that there isn't a single picture in the database. Now you have to go back to searching the internet for
another database with pictures. That probably isn't too hard, pictures after all are pretty common. So let's say you do
find a second database file containing pictures.

But what about group chats? What about people being removed from a group chat or leaving by themselves? What about

> pictures that can be viewed once but haven't been opened yet? What changed avatars on the public profile?

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
pictures that can be viewed once but haven't been opened yet? What about changed avatars on the public profile?
```

If you create your own test data you can be sure it covers all relevant user actions for your use case.

### The GDPR (or similar privacy legislation)

Using data you found online might be easy and good enough for your use case, but if it contains personal data using that
data is probably illegal under the GDPR, or at the very least a possible problem.

When you create your own test data with dummy accounts, you can rest assured there won't be any problems, as you're not
using real personal data.

⚠️ Be careful even when creating your own data! Some applications will automatically store data from other users (for
example public chat channels or "users nearby" features). If these features are included in your apps, you may still
need consider the GDPR.

### Exotic applications

Lastly, the most obvious point: some applications simply aren't that common, so finding data from them online or from
other sources is not an option.

## 1. Plan ahead

Now that you're convinced to create your own test data, let's get to it. The first step is careful planning. You might
be tempted to just start sending messages or start browsing in the app you want to generate reference data for, but from

> experience we learned creating test data is something best properly planned ahead.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
experience we learned that creating test data is something to plan ahead for.
```

### Investigate the application

As [stated before](#Completeness), apps these days have MANY features. Therefore, it's a good idea to explore the
application you want to create test data with. Even if you frequently use this app privately, you'll probably find
features you never knew existed.

If you're creating the reference data for a specific goal (forensic research, network analysis, or something else),
keep this goal in mind: if you're only doing forensic research on pictures, there's probably no need to delve into the
details of calendar appointments... Although: make sure to check if those appointments can contain a picture or
thumbnail!

The goal of this investigation is having a concise list of application features you want to cover.

### Create a script

When you have a list of all features you want to cover, it's time to write a script. And this isn't necessarily a Puma

> script: Puma can help you to automate actions, but if your reference data is about an app that Puma doesn't support, and

Reviewer 3: This sentences is pretty long, maybe you can snip it up.
